Coming up next is the Science Fiction Radio Show, so stay with us.
This is the Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction and fantasy.
And here are your hosts.
This is Daryl Lane.
And David Carson.
Ray Bradbury is a name familiar not to just readers of science fiction or fantasy, but
to almost any literate American or European.
Some of Bradbury's work, like the Martian Chronicles or Fahrenheit 451, are classics
that are admired by readers of all kinds and of all tastes.
He does indeed write science fiction, and fantasy, and horror, and weird stories, but
they're all done with a style and emotional texture that is unique to Bradbury.
Bradbury wrote from a very early age, as far back as his grammar school days in the Midwest.
But it wasn't until he was 19 and living in Los Angeles that he got the push that helped
him to get published.
He tells us about a group of science fiction writers in Los Angeles that gave him that
push.
Bruce Yerke, who was the secretary for the Science Fantasy Society, wrote me a letter
in October of 1937.
That was my last year in high school.
They invited me to come down to Clifton's cafeteria and meet the group.
And I was very shy and a little fearful.
I didn't know anyone.
But nevertheless, I got my courage together and went down to a meeting.
And that was my first encounter with Forrest Ackerman, who became my first editor.
He was editing a magazine called Imagination.
And then along over the next year or so, I met Henry Kupner, Arthur Barnes, Lee Brackett,
Robert Heinlein, Jack Williamson, Ross Rockland, Henry Hasse.
They all became friends.
And in one way or another, influenced me.
We were very close.
And I was beginning to write a lot of very bad science fiction, very bad fantasy.
I still haven't learned to write well.
But these people were very patient with me.
And especially, I remember Robert Heinlein and his wonderful wife, who invited me up
to their home on occasion.
I got to read a lot of his manuscripts before they were published.
He was just starting to write.
He came to a meeting at the Science Fantasy Club in, I believe it was 19, early 30, 38
or 39.
He had just written his first story and sold it to a stunning science fiction.
So he was a beginner, just as I was, except he was about 11 years older.
He was around, I would say, 31.
And I think I was 19 when I met him.
So it was that kind of situation where you had personal contact with writers who were
already established or were establishing themselves.
And of course, it changed my life forever because I had acceptance.
People were willing to put up with me and read my terrible stories.
Though Bradbury did get encouragement from these other writers, his fiction has always
been uniquely his own.
We asked him if it would be fair to call him a self-taught writer.
Well, I guess you can say that.
Most writing, almost every art form, is self-teaching.
Except what you need around the edges is shortcut.
If people can help you by recommending certain books, either books on writing or books which
give you examples of excellent writing.
I remember Henry Kutner was always calling Lee Brackett up or calling me up and saying,
hey, have you read Captain Adam Porter?
Do you know the work of John Collier?
What about Yudor O'Welty?
Well, this kind of shortcut is so important that you break away from your own field and
move on out into the wide culture and bring back into the science fiction and the fantasy
field influences from people like Kipling or Somerset Mom or John Collier.
So that's where having a good teacher is important.
Not that they teach you all that much or that intensely, but the fact that they care about
you at all is very good for your sense of malnutrition.
We all feel as if we haven't set ourselves well enough from here at that age.
We'll continue our conversation with Ray Bradbury next time.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show, a production of the Permian Basin Science
Fiction Association produced in conjunction with Odessa College in Odessa, Texas.
Coming up next is the Science Fiction Radio Show, so stay with us.
This is the Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction and fantasy.
And here are your hosts.
This is David Carson.
And Darrell Lane.
Ray Bradbury is an internationally known author who's managed to attract readers outside
the field of science fiction and fantasy.
In fact, he's one of the few writers of science fiction and fantasy whose name is almost instantly
recognizable outside the field.
He's also written so-called mainstream, or regular fiction ever since he began publishing
early in the 1940s.
Dan DeLion Wine, a poetic novel about a boy growing up in a small Midwestern town, is
one example of his non-science fiction output.
We asked him how he broke out of the restricted field of science fiction and gained such widespread
acceptance for all of his fiction with all types of readers.
Well, you just automatically think about it for a lifetime.
I always dreamt of being, number one, a writer, not a writer of science fiction or a writer
of fantasy, but a writer period.
I had huge heroes that I looked up to in the world, people like Shakespeare and a lot of
the great poets, Emily Dickinson and Robert Frost when I was in 19th.
And then as I got older and began to see the world of the theater around me more, I wanted
to do theater work.
I loved motion pictures.
I knew that eventually I wanted to do some films.
So my interests were always very Catholic, very broad, and it was only a matter of time
before I would experiment with each of these things.
And at the same time I was writing and having my first success in selling stories to Weirdtales,
I was beginning to write short stories in the larger fields, stories about racial relationships
or stories about travel inside America.
A little bit of everything I was experimenting with.
Bradbury said he was about 25 when he first began publishing stories that were not science
fiction or fantasy.
A friend of mine called me on the phone and said he was going to Mexico to travel for
two months.
Did I want to come along?
Well, I said I can't.
I don't have any money.
I was still only making around $20 a week selling stories to Weirdtales.
I usually sold six stories to Weirdtales every year, which gave me around $120 for the whole
year.
And then I sold an occasional murder mystery and a few science fiction stories.
So my income at the time was around $2,500 a year if I was lucky.
And he said, oh, you're such a coward.
He said, here the war is over.
War has been over in Europe a month or so.
You should travel and you're afraid to send out your short stories.
You're afraid of being rejected.
I know you've got a lot of excellent broad literary middle stream fictions.
I'm not sure we type them and send them out.
So by God, he egged me on and I got three short stories out of my files.
I re-typed them, put an assumed name on each one, William Elliott.
I mailed them off without an agent, without any representation, with not even a letter
from myself to the editors.
And one story to Charm, one story to Mademoiselle, and another one to Collier's.
Bradbury got a big surprise and a big paycheck after sending those three stories in.
Well, all three stories sold within three days of each other.
One story sold on August 19th to Charm, on the 20th, one to Mademoiselle, and on my birthday,
the 22nd of August, I sold my first short story to Collier's.
So all of a sudden, I had an aggregate of $1,000 which arrived in the mail.
Well, $1,000 back in 1945 would be like getting $15,000 in the mail today.
I was out of my head.
I couldn't believe it.
So without money, I picked up and went to Mexico with him for six weeks, where I had
a whole series of adventures that scared the hell out of me and caused me to write some
of my best weird stories when I came home.
So that's the way I made the transition, because someone called me a coward and dared me to
send my stories out.
On our next show, we'll have more with Ray Bradbury.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show, a production of the Permian Basin Science
Fiction Association produced in conjunction with Odessa College in Odessa, Texas.
Coming up next is the Science Fiction Radio Show.
So stay with us.
This is the Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction and fantasy.
And here are your hosts.
This is David Carson and Daryl Lane.
Ray Bradbury's The Martian Chronicles is one of the best known science fiction books produced
in this country.
It's poetic style, it's treatment of mankind's present problems, and its vision of man's
future make it a book admired not only by regular readers of science fiction, but by
anyone who reads it all.
The book is really a collection of related short stories concerning man's colonization
of Mars.
We asked Bradbury if he wrote each story with the entire volume in mind.
Well, I had meetings with various people at Simon & Schuster and Doubleday, and they
all said, look, we don't publish short stories, nobody buys them, nobody cares.
And then one night I had dinner with Walter Bradbury at Doubleday, no relation to me,
a wonderful gentleman, very bright gentleman, and sitting there at dinner that night he
said, Ray, what about all those Martian stories?
Isn't there a novel there?
Isn't there some way of hanging them all together?
It seems to me there's a common thread.
I said, oh my God, you know, years ago I made notes about doing a series of chronicles,
and then threw the notes somewhere and forgot about them.
So my subconscious must have remembered, and along through the years was putting these
beads on a single thread.
I went back to the YMCA that night, sat in my underwear, it was a hot, hot summer evening
terribly humid, and finished typing out an outline of a book which I called The Martian
Chronicles, which I then took to Doubleday the next day, and they promptly bought the
novel, plus the illustrated man, a collection of stories.
And I left New York City with, again, a fabulous $1,000, $500 for each book.
The stories are not scientifically accurate.
Man can breathe the Martian atmosphere unaided, for example, but they're not meant to be.
They have to be read symbolically, at a deep unconscious level which is triggered by
Bradbury's poetic way of writing.
There is an order to the 26 stories that make up The Martian Chronicles.
The final one is entitled The Million-Year Picnic, and we ask Bradbury why he put that one last.
It seemed a proper place to put it.
It seemed a culmination of all the stories, and that my job in looking at all my stories
was to guess where to place each, and well, some of them it was very easy.
I did a whole series of stories of first encounters on Mars with various expeditions.
So I knew those automatically had to be up front, along with an imaginary encounter in
Illa, where a woman dreams an invasion of Mars.
We never see the invasion itself of the Earthmen, but we know that secretly it must be there
somewhere, and the real people got killed by the jealous husband.
And then you go along through all the other encounters, and what happens to Mars as a result,
of the invasion by Earth people, and ending with all of your final beats, and a brief return to Earth
for there will come soft rains, and then The Million-Year Picnic at the end.
It all stalled together in roughly two hours in my head at the typewriter that night at the YMCA.
In 1980, NBC produced a major six-hour dramatization of The Martian Chronicles.
We asked Bradbury if he was happy with it.
I most certainly was not.
It was one of the most boring shows ever put on television, and it's a great shame.
Obviously no one enjoyed doing it, and the director obviously didn't enjoy it, which is a great shame,
because he should have got out of bed every morning and said, let's have a ball, let's play,
let's jump up and down and scream and yell and get something out of this material, but he obviously didn't do that.
We'll have more for you, Bradbury, on our next show.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show, a production of the Permian Basin Science Fiction Association
produced in conjunction with Odessa College in Odessa, Texas.
Coming up next is the Science Fiction Radio Show, so stay with us.
This is the Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction and fantasy.
And here are your hosts.
This is Daryl A.
And David Carson.
Ray Bradbury's 1962 novel, Something Wicked This Way Comes, is a classic of fantasy and horror.
It's about a carnival that comes to a small Midwestern town, a carnival with evil secrets beneath its colorful exterior,
and about two boys who discover the evil.
We asked Bradbury if there was a particular impetus behind the story.
Not really. It all started a long time ago.
I wrote a short story for weird tales called The Black Ferris.
And I've always been in love with carnivals and circuses and illustrated men and wars and picnics and you name it.
So over the years all this material accumulated.
And one night about 24 years ago, Gene Kelly invited me over to MGM Studios here
to see a new film of his called Invitation to the Dance.
And part of that film is a sort of dance ballet concerned with a clown, a carnival,
sort of material that Lon Cheney Sr. once did 60 years ago in American films.
He did a lot of films about circuses and armless, legless performers,
all kinds of grotesques that he worked with and pretended to imitate.
So I came out of the screening of Gene Kelly's film and walked home with my wife,
lamenting all the way the fact that I'd never worked for Kelly and wanting very much to do so.
So I got home and I rummaged through all my material to find something to send to Gene Kelly.
And I found the black ferris and I took several weeks to write it into a longer 70 page screen adaptation treatment outline.
And I took it to Kelly and he immediately said, my God, I must direct this.
Can I have an option on it? I'll take it to Europe and try to get some money.
He went to Europe for a number of weeks and months and finally returned and said, it's no use.
Nobody wants to put up any money for this.
Thanks very much and so long.
Well, I was heartbroken because I wanted to work for Kelly and I sat the heck with it.
I sat down and I wrote the long screen treatment into a novel.
It took me about two years and the novel was published in the late summer of 1962, 20 years ago.
The novel is a good example of Bradbury's beautifully poetic style.
It uses images of autumn and the gaudy colors of a carnival to convey hidden menace and evil.
The carnival rides, for instance, do strange things to people and the sideshow freaks and grotesques have unnatural horrifying powers.
Bradbury often uses carnival material as a symbol of evil. We asked him why.
I think most of us are uncomfortable around carnivals and circuses.
We sense that the people who run them are evil people.
There is something wrong with most carnival people.
The workers, it's a very tough life. It's a rough existence.
It's run by a bunch of tramps and vagabonds and people who go from town to town, they have no roots.
I should imagine there's a lot that goes on beyond the behind the scenes. We can't even guess that.
Not that there isn't a hierarchy there and a big circus, of course, there is.
There are the people at the top of the hierarchy or the trapeze people. They are the royal family.
Then you go downwards through the various levels of performers depending on their athletic powers.
But it's a very difficult life and it's a miracle if most of these people make it through and keep their sanity.
When you're a child, you sense, especially in the seedy little carnivals that come to visit your hometown,
you sense the uneasiness, the sly life, the sense of evil behind the scenes in these people.
I suppose that's where my fictions came from.
Something wicked this way comes is being made into a major motion picture by Disney Studios and should be out at the end of the year.
We'll continue next time with the works of Ray Bradbury.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show, a production of the Permian Basin Science Fiction Association,
produced in conjunction with Odessa College in Odessa, Texas.
The show is about the life of the world.
Coming up next is the Science Fiction Radio Show, so stay with us.
This is the Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction and fantasy.
And here are your hosts.
This is David Carson.
And Daryl Lane.
One of Ray Bradbury's classic novels is Fahrenheit 451.
It's a chilling picture of a future society in which books are outlawed and humans are weakened by addiction to a totally electronic society.
A person who possesses a book is subject to severe punishment and there's even a government institution composed of firemen whose job it is to seek out all books and burn them.
We asked Bradbury if there was a particular episode or inspiration behind Fahrenheit 451.
We asked him to write a few American books off of foreign library shelves in army libraries.
And then President Eisenhower ordered them all put back on, which proved what a bright man he was.
Thank goodness.
But he was during that period that I suppose my subconscious permitted on all this and said,
I've got to do a book about my anger about libraries because libraries is really the place where I was born and raised myself, grew up and have lived for a lifetime.
They really are very super special to me.
And I go in bookstores constantly.
I can't stay away from them.
I buy too many books.
I'm compulsive about it.
So the novel wrote itself in nine days.
I went up to UCLA in 19, this is back in 1950.
And I spent nine days there in the typing room in the basement of the UCLA library with about 12 students sitting around me.
And I played these dime a half hour typewriter machines.
And I typed the novel on those dime machines and I spent around $9.40 typing the novel.
So it's a grand place to write a book like that, isn't it, in the basement of a library.
Bradbury seems to be pointing out the dangers of a technological society in the novel.
And some of his other work, like the Martian Chronicles, has some of the same warnings.
We asked him if his work is anti-technological.
Well, that's a misinterpretation. It's never been true.
I've never mistrusted technology as only people. There's a big difference there.
It's the way we use the automobile, for instance.
There's nothing wrong with cars that having more safe drivers won't change.
Now, when it comes to computers, space travel, IBM's electric typewriters, these are all beautiful.
We're using them well. And the future is very exciting because of it.
Now, I've tried to pick those technologies that I criticized.
For instance, there was a certain moment in history in Los Angeles where they were threatening to put Muzak with advertising on our buses.
And I immediately mounted a campaign with some friends, thousands of people who said,
oh, no, you don't. Bad enough we have all these posters all over the place.
But to trap us on buses, then, make us listen to music we don't want to hear, or advertisements we don't want to hear.
So I'm anti the way that particular technology was going to be used.
We asked Bradbury if he thought there was any danger of book burning or censorship today.
We hear those rumors every year. And there are always some stupid librarians, some stupid mayor,
or some dumb pressure group in some town somewhere in our country every year for the last 60 years.
If it wants to censor this, it censor that. And then they blow away. They're just chaffin' the wind.
And don't pay any attention to them. And if they grow giant size, call me on the phone.
I'll come over and kick them in the kishkis. Okay?
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show, a production of the Permian Basin Science Fiction Association,
produced in conjunction with Odessa College in Odessa, Texas.